what do you think is the most badass
animal on earth a live cheetah taking
down a rhino 20 times its own weight or
a carefree honey badger chewing on a
venomous snake and napping off the toxin
while these and more are experts in
their field there is another animal one
you might never have even heard of that
leaves all others in the dust when it
comes to sheer survival it's called a
tardigrade with eight legs ending in
sharp hooked claws and a sucker-like
mouth within dagger sharp teeth they
sound like the stuff of nightmares but
don't worry they're only a millimeter
long and strangely cute earning their
other names water bears or Moss piglets
you'll find one of their 900 species
most places you find water from the
bottom of a lake to the moss on your
roof they take life easy something that
their name
tardigrades references it means slow
steppers because that's just what they
do so far so cute but tardigrades have
got so much more hiding beneath that
plump wriggling exterior they are in
fact virtually indestructible even
though they like all other living
creatures need water to survive and
reproduce they found a way to do it
without it when they need to because the
hazard of living in the moss on your
roof is that sometimes the moss dries up
without water a tardigrade has a
remarkable ability to dry itself out
curling itself up into a dry husk called
a ton and slowing its metabolism by a
factor of 10,000
in this dry lifeless state they can
survive without a drop of water for
weeks months years even decades then
when conditions have moister they
rehydrate boot back up and carry on as
if nothing had happened
surviving the occasional dry spell makes
sense when you're a water-loving animal
living on land but what doesn't make
sense is the tardigrades other super
survival skills they can survive when
it's hot and I mean really really hot
experimenters exposed them to
temperatures of more than 150 degrees
Celsius for 15 minutes or so and they
came back to life and carried on as if
nothing
had happened they can survive when it's
cold - and I mean unbelievably
ridiculously cold chilling them down to
minus two hundred and seventy two point
eight degrees Celsius that's just about
as cold as it gets a smidge above
absolute zero
at this temperature even atoms stop
vibrating in place they've got so little
energy so what happened to the
tardigrades when they came back from the
deep freeze
well they carried on as if nothing had
happened they can survive crushing
pressures to the highest pressure found
on earth is at the bottom of the
Marianas Trench in the Pacific Ocean at
around 100 megapascals for most animals
fats are clumped together and DNA is
damaged about 1/3 of the way down but
scientists found that tardigrades could
withstand not only the intense pressure
at the bottom but a further six times
more at 600 mega Pascal's and when they
returned to more normal pressures guess
what they carried on as if nothing had
happened
they can even survive the cold vacuum of
space not navigating a micelle your
network but hitching a ride on the
outside of a satellite in 2008 European
scientists sent a package of 3,000
dried-up tardigrades into low-earth
orbit for ten days where they
experienced cold temperatures incredibly
low pressures and a dangerous
bombardment of cosmic radiation not all
of them made it but some survived the
full exposure to the sun's UV light
which is 1000 times stronger in space
than on earth and when they were
rehydrated back on earth they just
carried on as if nothing happened
yep it is absolutely astounding the
range of environment that the
tardigrades can survive scientists call
them extremophiles extreme lovers for
this very reason other extremophiles do
exist but few have the ability to
withstand such a wide range of
conditions
and yet still choose to live in the most
innocuous of places the fact that they
can hunker down and whether through
conditions much more extreme than you'd
find on earth does raise the question
though why are they a tiny alien master
race that have survived the trip from
the Stars to retire peacefully on the
moss on our fruits do they possess
supernatural powers in fact the secret
to their survival might be something a
lots more elegant
since water bears live in moist
environments that can and often do dry
up they needed to adapt to occasional
desiccation in order to survive they
have a cocktail of chemical mechanisms
that kick in to protect their cells and
their DNA when water is scarce but all
of those other extreme conditions I've
mentioned also risk damaging their cells
and DNA as this damage that would kill a
lesser animal while the tardigrade has
its chemical cocktail to keep it safe so
it's likely that a necessary adaptation
to a hot dry summer on your roof also
gave them the toolkit they needed to
survive pretty much anywhere making them
without a doubt the hardest animal in
the universe have you heard about the
tardigrade and it's crazy survival
skills let me know in the comments below
and if you enjoyed this video give us a
like and subscribe to earth unplugged
for amazing nature in science videos
I'll see you next time